 
International Journal of
Geo-Information
Article
MGWR: A Python Implementation of Multiscale
Geographically Weighted Regression for
Investigating Process Spatial Heterogeneity and Scale
Taylor M. Oshan 1,*, Ziqi Li 2, Wei Kang 3, Levi J. Wolf 4 and A. Stewart Fotheringham 2
1
Center for Geospatial Information Science, Department of Geographical Sciences, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD 20740, USA
2
Spatial Analysis Research Center, School of Geographical Sciences an Urban Planning, Arizona State
University, Tempe 85281, AZ, USA; lziqi@asu.edu (Z.L.); sfotheri@asu.edu (A.S.F.)
3
Center for Geospatial Sciences, School of Public Policy, University of California, Riverside 92521, CA, USA;
weikang@ucr.edu
4
School of Geographical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1SS, UK; levi.john.wolf@bristol.ac.uk
*
Correspondence: toshan@umd.edu
Received: 16 April 2019; Accepted: 5 June 2019; Published: 8 June 2019
Abstract: Geographically weighted regression (GWR) is a spatial statistical technique that recognizes
that traditional ‘global’ regression models may be limited when spatial processes vary with spatial
context. GWR captures process spatial heterogeneity by allowing effects to vary over space. To do
this, GWR calibrates an ensemble of local linear models at any number of locations using ‘borrowed’
nearby data. This provides a surface of location-speciﬁc parameter estimates for each relationship in
the model that is allowed to vary spatially, as well as a single bandwidth parameter that provides
intuition about the geographic scale of the processes. A recent extension to this framework allows
each relationship to vary according to a distinct spatial scale parameter, and is therefore known as
multiscale (M)GWR. This paper introduces mgwr, a Python-based implementation of MGWR that
explicitly focuses on the multiscale analysis of spatial heterogeneity. It provides novel functionality
for inference and exploratory analysis of local spatial processes, new diagnostics unique to multi-scale
local models, and drastic improvements to efﬁciency in estimation routines. We provide two case
studies using mgwr, in addition to reviewing core concepts of local models. We present this in
a literate programming style, providing an overview of the primary software functionality and
demonstrations of suggested usage alongside the discussion of primary concepts and demonstration
of the improvements made in mgwr.
Keywords: multiscale; gwr; spatial statistics; heterogeneity; scale; mgwr
1. Introduction
Geographically weighted regression (GWR) is a spatial statistical technique that, like aspatial local
regression, recognizes that traditional ‘global’ regression models may be limited when processes vary
by context. GWR captures process’s spatial heterogeneity (i.e., process variation by spatial context)
via an operationalization of Tobler’s ﬁrst law of geography: “everything is related to everything
else, but near things are more related than distant things” [1]. An ensemble of local linear models
are calibrated at any number of locations by ‘borrowing’ nearby data. The result is a surface of
location-speciﬁc parameter estimates for each relationship in the model that may vary spatially, as well
as a single bandwidth parameter that provides intuition about the geographic scale of the processes.
In addition, GWR typically provides increased model ﬁt and reduced residual spatial autocorrelation
compared to a traditional ‘global’ regression that assumes relationships are constant over space [2].
ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2019, 8, 269; doi:10.3390/ijgi8060269
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijgi
ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2019, 8, 269
2 of 31
A recent extension to the GWR framework allows each relationship in the model to vary at a
unique spatial scale and is therefore known as multiscale (M)GWR [3]. MGWR is much less restrictive
in its assumptions than GWR, since the relationship between the response and a covariate is allowed to
vary locally, vary regionally, and or not vary at all. Eliminating the restriction that all relationships vary
at the same spatial scale can minimize over-ﬁtting, reduce bias in the parameter estimates, and mitigate
concurvity (i.e., collinearity due to similar functional transformations). Therefore, MGWR has been
suggested as the default local model speciﬁcation when using GWR to investigate process spatial
heterogeneity and scale.
This paper introduces mgwr (throughout this manuscript mgwr refers to the software implementation,
while MGWR refers to the technique more generally), a Python-based software package for deploying
GWR and MGWR models. Though there are existing software options, they are limited in terms of
available functionality, computational efﬁciency, or both. For example, there is a GWR tool in the
spatial analyst toolbox within ArcGIS [4] and there are several options within the R ecosystem, such
as spgwr [5] and gwrr [6]. However, none of these implementations offers capabilities to calibrate 