David Wheeler Æ Michael Tiefelsdorf
Multicollinearity and correlation
among local regression coefﬁcients
in geographically weighted regression
Received: 25 October 2004 / Accepted: 21 February 2005
 Springer-Verlag 2005
Abstract Present methodological research on geographically weighted
regression (GWR) focuses primarily on extensions of the basic GWR
model, while ignoring well-established diagnostics tests commonly used in
standard global regression analysis. This paper investigates multicollin-
earity issues surrounding the local GWR coeﬃcients at a single location
and the overall correlation between GWR coeﬃcients associated with two
diﬀerent exogenous variables. Results indicate that the local regression
coeﬃcients are potentially collinear even if the underlying exogenous
variables in the data generating process are uncorrelated. Based on these
ﬁndings, applied GWR research should practice caution in substantively
interpreting the spatial patterns of local GWR coeﬃcients. An empirical
disease-mapping example is used to motivate the GWR multicollinearity
problem. Controlled experiments are performed to systematically explore
coeﬃcient dependency issues in GWR. These experiments specify global
models that use eigenvectors from a spatial link matrix as exogenous
variables.
This study was supported by grant number 1 R1 CA95982-01, Geographic-Based
Research in Cancer Control and Epidermiology, from the National Cancer Institute.
The author thank the anonymous reviewers and the editor for their helpful comments.
D. Wheeler (&)
Department of Geography, The Ohio State University,
1036 Derby Hall, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
E-mail: wheeler.173@osu.edu
M. Tiefelsdorf
School of Social Sciences,
University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75083, USA
E-mail: tiefelsdorf@utdallas.edu
J Geograph Syst (2005) 7: 161–187
DOI: 10.1007/s10109-005-0155-6
ORIGINAL PAPER
Keywords Geographically weighted regression Æ Multicollinearity Æ
Local regression diagnostics Æ Spatial eigenvectors Æ Experimental
spatial design
1 Introduction
Geographically weighted regression (GWR) aims at identifying spatial het-
erogeneities in regression models of geo-referenced data. The spatial vari-
ability of the estimated local regression coeﬃcients is usually examined to
determine whether the underlying data generating process exhibits spatial
heterogeneities or local deviations from a global regression model. A com-
mon procedure is to map the spatial GWR coeﬃcient pattern associated with
each exogenous variable. This approach, however, ignores potential depen-
dencies among the local regression coeﬃcients associated with diﬀerent
exogenous variables. Attention in this paper centers on these potential
dependencies among the local coeﬃcients. They can be expressed either as
the correlation between pairs of local regression coeﬃcients at one location or
as the correlation between two overall sets of local coeﬃcient estimates
associated with two exogenous variables at all locations. Weak dependencies
of either form hamper a substantive interpretation of the local GWR esti-
mates, whereas strong dependencies induce artifacts that invalidate any
meaningful interpretation and search for spatial heterogeneities because the
regression coeﬃcients are no longer uniquely deﬁned.
The development of GWR started from local regression and smoothing
techniques (Brunsdon et al. 1996; Fotheringham et al. 1998) and became
increasingly more sophisticated by considering, for example, maximum
likelihood estimation of the kernel bandwidths (Pa´ ez et al. 2002a), spatial
autocorrelation among the residuals (Pa´ ez et al. 2002b), generalized linear
model speciﬁcations (Fotheringham et al. 2002) and Bayesian GWR (LeSage
2001, 2004). Some diagnostic tests in GWR have also become more
sophisticated, for instance, the development of formal test statistics for
spatial nonstationarity and heterogeneity of the local model parameters
(Leung et al. 2000). Aside from coeﬃcient maps associated with single
exogenous variables and local t-values, however, none of these developments
pay much attention to fundamental regression diagnostics, such as residual
analysis or the overall stability of the model. In general terms, model stability
depends very much on the joint-distribution of the exogenous variables as
demonstrated in the classical analysis by Longley (1967), where regression
coeﬃcients changed signs depending on whether speciﬁc exogenous variables
or particular observations were in or excluded in the model. The uncer-
tainties and numerical instabilities in this classical analysis are induced by the
multicollinearity among the exogenous variables that lead to correlation
among the estimated regression coeﬃcients. In addition to these technical
dimensions of multicollinearity, there are also more substantive ramiﬁcations
aﬀecting our ability to conduct an informed model interpretation: Fox (1997,
p 351) states that ‘‘collinearity deals fundamentally with the inability to
se