Econometrics 2014, 2, 217-249; doi:10.3390/econometrics2040217
OPEN ACCESS
econometrics
ISSN 2225-1146
www.mdpi.com/journal/econometrics
Article
The Biggest Myth in Spatial Econometrics
James P. LeSage 1,* and R. Kelley Pace 2
1 Department of Finance and Economics, McCoy College of Business Administration,
Texas State University, 601 University Drive, San Marcos, TX 78666, USA
2 Department of Finance, E.J. Ourso College of Business Administration, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA; E-Mail: kelley@pace.am
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: james.lesage@txstate.edu;
Tel.: +1-512-245-0256.
External Editor: Kerry Patterson
Received: 29 September 2014; in revised form: 18 November 2014 / Accepted: 8 December 2014 /
Published: 23 December 2014
Abstract: There is near universal agreement that estimates and inferences from spatial
regression models are sensitive to particular speciﬁcations used for the spatial weight
structure in these models. We ﬁnd little theoretical basis for this commonly held belief, if
estimates and inferences are based on the true partial derivatives for a well-speciﬁed spatial
regression model. We conclude that this myth may have arisen from past applied work that
incorrectly interpreted the model coefﬁcients as if they were partial derivatives, or from use
of misspeciﬁed models.
Keywords: indirect effects; spatial regression estimates; sensitivity to spatial weights
JEL classiﬁcations: C18, C21
1. Introduction
It has become a near universal criticism of spatial regression models that estimates and inferences
are sensitive to the spatial weight matrix used in the model. For concreteness in our discussion we let a
spatial regression (SAR) model take the form:
y
=
αιn + ρWy + Xβ + ε
(1)
ε
∼
N(0, σ2In)
Econometrics 2014, 2
218
where y is an n × 1 vector of observations on the dependent variable and X is an n × k matrix of
observations on the explanatory variables. Each of these observations on the dependent and explanatory
variables comes from regions or points in space. Also, β is a k × 1 vector of parameters associated with
the explanatory variables, ιn is a vector of ones, α is the associated intercept parameter, and ρ is the scalar
dependence parameter (commonly in the interval [0, 1]).1 The n disturbances ε are distributed normally
with constant variance σ2 and zero covariance across observations. The matrix W is the spatial weight
matrix that contains non-zero elements wij if observations j and i are neighbors and zero otherwise.
Typically, the matrix W is row-stochastic, so the n × 1 spatial lag vector Wy contains values constructed
from an average of neighboring observations.2 A more elaborate variant of the SAR model, labeled the
spatial Durbin model (SDM) in the literature, replaces the matrix X with

X
WX

.
In their introduction to a special issue of Papers in Regional Science entitled:
“New spatial
econometric techniques and applications in regional science,” Arbia and Fingleton [2] summarize the
criticism of spatial regression models as being sensitive to weight matrix speciﬁcations stating:
This problem of what the spatial lag actually represents is bound up with the problem of deﬁnition
of the spatial weights matrix, which is assumed to be a nonstochastic matrix capturing our
hypothesis about the nature of the spatial interactions we are modelling. The problem is that,
unlike the simple notion of a time series lag, the spatial lag is a very ﬂuid and complex entity
open to multiple deﬁnitions within a single study. Critics of spatial econometrics almost always
in our experience home in on the arbitrary nature of the weights matrix, asking “how is it deﬁned
and why is it precisely like that when it could easily have been like this, what does it mean,
and are not the results obtained conditional on somewhat arbitrary decisions taken about its
structure?”. Some future research on the robustness of outcomes to variations in assumptions about
the weight matrix structure would be helpful in allaying such criticisms, although ideally carefully
structured arguments coming from theory and leading precisely to the typical reduced form spatial
econometric model, with a spatial lag and exogenous lags also, are the preferred option.
We view the notion that the explanatory variable effects and inferences are sensitive to use of a
particular weight matrix as perhaps the biggest myth about spatial regression models. For the model
in Equation (1) consider two model speciﬁcations based on weight matrices Wa and Wb, with the same
sample data y, X. If Way and Wby are highly correlated, it would seem difﬁcult to reach materially
different conclusions about the partial derivative impact of changes in the explanatory variables in the
1
Theoretical bounds for this parameter are set forth in LeSage and Pace [1], and depend on minimum and maximum
eigenvalues of the spatial weight matrix W.
2
In linear algebra a row-stochastic matrix has non-negative entrie