-~ 
____ 
Chris Brunsdon, A. Stewart Fotheringham 
and Martin E. Charlton 
Geographically Weighted Regression: A Method 
for Exploring Spatial Nonstationarity 
Spatial nonstationarity is a condition in which a simple ‘global” model cannot 
explain the relationships between some sets of variables. The nature of the 
model must alter over space to reflect the structure within the data. In this 
paper, a technique is developed, termed geogra hically weighted regression, 
model which allows diferent relationships to exist at diferent points in space. 
This technique is loosely based on kernel regression. The method itself is intro- 
duced and related issues such as the choice of a spatial weighting function are 
discussed. Following this, a series of related statistical tests are considered 
which can be described generally as tests for spatial nonstationarity. Using 
Monte Carlo methods, techniques are proposed for investigatin 
the null 
non-stationa y one and also for testing whether individual regression coefi- 
cients are stable over geographic space. These techniques are demonstrated on a 
data set from the 1991 U. 
K. census relating car ownership rates to social class 
and mule unemployment. The paper concludes by discussing ways in which the 
technique can be extended. 
which attempts to capture this variation by Cali E rating a multiple regression 
hypothesis that the data m y  be described by a global model rat a er than a 
1. INTRODUCTION 
One of the main objectives in spatial analysis is to identify the nature of rela- 
tionships that exist between variables. Typically this is undertaken by calculating 
statistics or estimating parameters with observations taken from different spatial 
units across a study area. The resulting statistics or parameter estimates are 
assumed to be constant across space although this might be a very questionable 
assumption to make in many circumstances. It seems reasonable to assume that 
there might be intrinsic differences in relationships over space or that there 
might be some problem with the specification of the model from which the rela- 
tionships are being measured and which manifests itself in terms of spatially 
Dr. Chris Brunsdon is lecturer in computer-based methods in the Department of Town 
and County Planning, A. Stewart Fotheringham is Professor of Quantitative Geography, 
and Martin Charlton is lecturer in GIS in the Department of Geography, all at Newcastle 
University. 
Geographical Analysis, Vol. 28, No. 4 (October 1996) 0 
1996 Ohio State University Press 
Submitted 6/7/95. Revised version accepted 2/16/96. 
282 / Geographical Analysis 
varying parameter estimates. In either case it would be useful to have a means 
of describing and map ing such spatial variations as an exploratory tool for 
Several techniques already exist for this purpose although we argue that the 
method we develop in this paper has several important advantages. Perhaps the 
most well-known framework in which parameter “drift” has been measured is 
that of Casetti’s expansion method (Casetti 1972; Casetti and Jones 1992). In 
this framework, parameters in a global model can be made functions of geo- 
graphic space so that trends in parameter variation over space can be measured 
(inter alia, Fotheringham and Pitts 1995; Eldridge and Jones 1991). While this 
is an important framework in which improved models can be developed, it is a 
trend-fitting exercise which is of limited use in situations where parameters 
exhibit complex variation over the space being studied. The method pro- 
posed here, that of geographically weighted regression (GWR), allows the 
actual parameters for each location in space to be estimated and mapped as 
opposed to having a trend surface fitted to them. 
The method of spatial adaptive filtering (SAF) has also been proposed to 
handle spatially varying relationships (Foster and Gorr 1986; Gorr and Olligs- 
chlaeger 1994). However, this approach incorporates spatial relationships in a 
rather ad hoc manner and produces parameter estimates that cannot be tested 
statistically so that it is of limited applicability. 
Two other methods that model spatial variations in parameter estimates are 
the random coefficients model (Aitken 1996) and multilevel modeling (Gold- 
stein 1987). In both these ap roaches the parameter estimates in regression 
models are assumed to be ran dp om variables. In multilevel modeling, the distri- 
bution of the parameter estimates is assumed to be Gaussian, while in the ran- 
dom coefficients model, the parameters are modeled as finite mixture distribu- 
tions. In either case, by using Bayes’ theorem it is possible to obtain an estimate 
of each parameter although in neither case is any spatial dependency assumed 
in the parameter estimates which seems unrealistic in models of spatial phenom- 
ena. Although geographical variations of multilevel models have been applied 
(Jones 1991), these rely heavily on an assumed hierarchy of